.TH "LRSNASH" "1" "2020.7.28" "July 2020" "lrslib 7\&.2"
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" * Define some portability stuff
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.\" http://bugs.debian.org/507673
.\" http://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/groff/2009-02/msg00013.html
.\" ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.ie (.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el       .ds Aq '
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" * set default formatting
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" disable hyphenation
.nh
.\" disable justification (adjust text to left margin only)
.ad l
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.\" * MAIN CONTENT STARTS HERE *
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "NAME"
lrsnash: \  
Compute Nash-equibria in 2-person games\&.
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.HP \w'\fBlrsnash\fR \ [options...] [input-file] \ 'u
\fBlrsnash\fR \ [options...] [input-file] 
.HP \w'\fBlrsnash1\fR\ [options...] [input-file] \ 'u
\fBlrsnash1\fR\ [options...] [input-file] 
.HP \w'\fBlrsnash2\fR\ [options...] [input-file] \ 'u
\fBlrsnash2\fR\ [options...] [input-file] 
.HP \w'\fBnashdemo\fR\ \ 'u
\fBnashdemo\fR\  
.PP
options:
    -v, --verbose         Prints a trace of the solution process
    -d, --debug           Dumps lots of information for debugging
    -p, --printgame       Prints the payoff matrix for the game
    -s, --standard        Promise that input files have standard structure
    -o, --outfile <file>  Send output to <file>
    -h, --help            Prints this text
     Short options can be grouped, as in '-ps' and '-do out.txt'


.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
These C programs are distributed as part of the \m[blue]\fBlsrslib\fR\m[]\u[2] package
and must be compiled with it.

Alice has a payoff matrix A and Bob has a playoff matrix B, both of dimension m by n.
Alice assigns probabilities x to the rows and Bob y to the columns.
Alice receives payoff x^T A y and Bob receives x^T B y.
A Nash equilibriam 
occurs for pairs x,y for which neither player can improve their expected payoff
by unilateraly changing strategies.

.PP
\fIlrsnash\fR
is an application of \fIlrs\fR for finding Nash-equilibria
in 2-person matrix games
using a method described in \u[1]. It uses GMP exact extended precision arithmetic.

\fIlrsnash1\fR
is the same as \fIlrsnash\fR
except that it uses 64 bit exact arithmetic and terminates if overflow is detected.
It is about 3-4 times faster.

\fIlrsnash2\fR
is the same as \fIlrsnash\fR
except that it uses 128 bit exact arithmetic and terminates if overflow is detected.
It is about twice as fast. It requires a C
compiler with __int128 support (eg. gcc v. 4.6.0 or later).

\fInashdemo\fR
is a simple template for \fIlrsnash\fR.
It builds two 3x4 matrices A and B and computes their equilibria.

The running time may be significantly different depending on the order of the
two matrices in the input. For large problems it may be advantageous to
run \fIlrsnash\fR twice in parallel with the matrices
in different orders.
There is also a more complex legacy input format recognized by
\fIlrsnash\fR that is described in \u[1].

.SH FILE FORMATS
.PP
The input file consists of two integers m and n on line 1
followed by two mxn payoff matrices A and B:

 m n                                            
 A          (row by row)                    
 B          (row by row)      

.SH EXAMPLE
The input file game  has two 3x2 payoff matrices:

 %cat game

 3 2
 
 0 6
 2 5
 3 3
 
 1 0
 0 2
 4 3

 % lrsnash game
 
 2  1/3  2/3  4 
 1  2/3  1/3  0  2/3 
 
 2  2/3  1/3  3 
 1  0  1/3  2/3  8/3 
 
 2  1  0  3 
 1  0  0  1  4 
 
 *Number of equilibria found: 3
 *Player 1: vertices=5 bases=5 pivots=8
 *Player 2: vertices=3 bases=1 pivots=8

\fBInterpretation\fR
There are 3 Nash equilibria. For the first one:

 2  1/3  2/3  4    
.br
Bob(player 2) plays column 1 and 2 with probablilities y=(1/3, 2/3) 
and the payoff to Alice(player 1) is 4.

 1  2/3  1/3  0  2/3
.br
Alice plays rows 1,2,3 with probabilities x=(2/3, 1/3, 0) and the payoff to Bob is 2/3.

.SH NOTES
.IP 1. 4
D. Avis, G. Rosenberg, R. Savani, B. von Stengel, \fIEnumeration of Nash Equilibria for Two-Player Games\fR,
Economic Theory 42(2009) 9-37
.IP 2. 4
User's guide for lrslib
.RS 4
\%http://cgm.cs.mcgill.ca/%7Eavis/C/lrslib/USERGUIDE.html
.RE
.SH AUTHORS
David Avis and Terje Lensberg
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR lrslib (1)
